1. INTRODUCTION
The present report is based on the European
Forest Fire Information System (EFFIS)
established by the Joint Research Centre and
Directorate General for Environment of the
European Commission (EC) to support fire
management in Europe and on the contributions
by the national forest fire services in the
countries.
Over the years, EFFIS has become a focal point
for information on forest fires in Europe; it
delivers data and information to support forest
fire prevention, preparedness and fire fighting
activities on a daily basis since 2000.
Competent national authorities of EU Member
States and of European neighbour countries work
together with EC services on a purely voluntary
basis to sustain the EFFIS system; this year they
have provided, as in the previous years, important
contributions to this report.
The report is the 11th of the Forest Fires in
Europe report series. It provides a summary of
the 2010 fire season following the usual structure,
a first part containing individual country reports
and a second part with EFFIS assessments.
Summary statistical tables with historical fire data
by country are given in the appendix.
2010 has been overall a relatively mild year for
forest fires in Europe, except for Portugal that
was affected by remarkable fire activity especially
in the first half of August. The total burnt area in
Europe (274 000 ha) was quite below the long
term average. However about 50% of the burnt
land was concentrated in Portugal, where the
meteorological fire danger conditions assessed by
EFFIS in the first half of August 2010 were
among the worst of the last decade for the
country.
In 2010 EFFIS has continued including Northern
African countries in the mapping of burnt areas
and the assessment of fire danger forecast. This is
intended to be a first step towards the enlargement
of EFFIS to the non-European countries of the
Mediterranean basin in the context of the
collaboration between the EC and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of United Nations
(FAO).
This year, for the first time, the report also
includes a contribution from Russia. In European
Russia, the 2010 fire season was the worst on
record. A severe drought combined with record-
high temperatures and strong winds led to a large
number of fires that burnt simultaneously
producing large smoke clouds with a strong
impact on the city of Moscow and nearby urban
areas.
At the time of drafting the present report (July
2011) the new fire season in Europe is on-going.
During 2011 spring, unusually hot and dry
weather over temperate Europe induced
remarkable fire activity in this region,
significantly affecting countries like Belgium,
Ireland and United Kingdom, which are normally
safely excluded from the main forest fire arena.
On other hand, the Mediterranean countries,
normally far more affected by forest fires, have
been relatively cool and wet in the first part of the
summer, and therefore have not suffered major
damages so far. However, most of the summer
still remains in this fire season and we have to
wait before making a final assessment of the
season.
The competent Commission departments are
continuing to seek out the best solutions for
limiting the impact of forest fires within the EU
and neighbouring countries, and the members of
its Expert Group on Forest Fires meet regularly
to exchange the lessons learnt from previous fire
campaigns and to contribute to the further
development of EFFIS.
National authorities are seeking ways to prevent
fires and for combating them as early as possible.
Together, the European Commission and the
national forest fire authorities are working on
finding the best ways to avoid unnecessary fire
impacts. Despite this, basic forest fire prevention
measures applied so far with EU funding,
including awareness-raising campaigns and
training of those involved in the forest fire issue,
are sometimes not always as effective as they
could be, in particular in Mediterranean high risk
areas. Additional efforts are needed to make the
use of EU budget available for prevention, fire-
fighting and restoration as efficient as possible.
In the future, we need to continue to be prepared
and stay vigilant to minimise the impact of forest
fires. We can achieve this by launching yearly
awareness-raising campaigns, using early fire
detection tools, carrying out forest fire prevention
measures of all kinds, forecasting and assessing
fire danger, and last but not least, by developing
further fire research activities Furthermore, the
maintenance fire-fighting equipment and human
resources and the mutual assistance between
Member States in coordination with the European
Commission's Monitoring and Information Centre
are essential in forest fire fighting.
